=head1 NAME

Apache2::ConnectionUtil - Perl API for Apache connection utils




=head1 Synopsis

   use Apache2::Connection     ();
   use Apache2::ConnectionUtil ();
   use Apache2::RequestRec     ();

   # grab the connection object;
   my $c = $r->connection;

   # share perl objects like $r->pnotes
   $old_val = $c->pnotes($key => $value);






=head1 Description

C<Apache2::ConnectionUtil> provides the
L<Apache connection record object|docs::2.0::api::Apache2::Connection>
utilities API.





=head1 API

C<Apache2::ConnectionUtil> provides the following functions and/or
methods:








=head2 C<pnotes>

Share Perl variables between requests over the lifetime of the
connection.

   $old_val  = $c->pnotes($key => $val);
   $val      = $c->pnotes($key);
   $hash_ref = $c->pnotes();



=over 4

=item obj: C<$c>
( C<L<Apache2::Connection object|docs::2.0::api::Apache2::Connection>> )

=item opt arg1: C<$key> ( string )

A key value

=item opt arg2: C<$val> ( SCALAR )

Any scalar value (e.g. a reference to an array)

=item ret: (3 different possible values)

if both, C<$key> and C<$val> are passed the previous value for C<$key> is
returned if such existed, otherwise undef is returned.

if only C<$key> is passed, the current value for the given key is returned.

if no arguments are passed, a hash reference is returned, which can then 
be directly accessed without going through the C<pnotes()> interface.

=item since: 2.0.3

=back

See 
(C<L<Apache2::RequestUtil::pnotes|docs::2.0::api::Apache2::RequestUtil/C_pnotes_>>)
for the details of the C<pnotes> method usage.  The usage is identical
except for a few differences.  First is the use of C<$c> instead of 
C<$r> as
the invocant.  The second is that the the data persists for the lifetime of
the connection instead of the lifetime of the request.  If the connection is
lost, so is the data stored in C<pnotes>.



=head1 See Also

L<Apache2::Connection|docs::2.0::api::Apache2::Connection>.

L<Apache2::RequestUtil::pnotes|docs::2.0::api::Apache2::RequestUtil/C_pnotes_>.

L<mod_perl 2.0 documentation|docs::2.0::index>.


=head1 Copyright

mod_perl 2.0 and its core modules are copyrighted under
The Apache Software License, Version 2.0.




=head1 Authors

L<The mod_perl development team and numerous
contributors|about::contributors::people>.

=cut


